neg	plot : two teen couples go to a church party , drink and then drive . 
neg	they get into an accident . 
neg	one of the guys dies , but his girlfriend continues to see him in her life , and has nightmares . 
neg	what ' s the deal ? 
neg	watch the movie and " sorta " find out . 
neg	. 
neg	. 
neg	critique : a mind - fuck movie for the teen generation that touches on a very cool idea , but presents it in a very bad package . 
neg	which is what makes this review an even harder one to write , since i generally applaud films which attempt to break the mold , mess with your head and such ( lost highway & memento ) , but there are good and bad ways of making all types of films , and these folks just didn ' t snag this one correctly . 
neg	they seem to have taken this pretty neat concept , but executed it terribly . 
neg	so what are the problems with the movie ? 
neg	well , its main problem is that it ' s simply too jumbled . 
neg	it starts off " normal " but then downshifts into this " fantasy " world in which you , as an audience member , have no idea what ' s going on . 
neg	there are dreams , there are characters coming back from the dead , there are others who look like the dead , there are strange apparitions , there are disappearances , there are a looooot of chase scenes , there are tons of weird things that happen , and most of it is simply not explained . 
neg	now i personally don ' t mind trying to unravel a film every now and then , but when all it does is give me the same clue over and over again , i get kind of fed up after a while , which is this film ' s biggest problem . 
neg	it ' s obviously got this big secret to hide , but it seems to want to hide it completely until its final five minutes . 
neg	and do they make things entertaining , thrilling or even engaging , in the meantime ? 
neg	not really . 
neg	the sad part is that the arrow and i both dig on flicks like this , so we actually figured most of it out by the half - way point , so all of the strangeness after that did start to make a little bit of sense , but it still didn ' t the make the film all that more entertaining . 
neg	i guess the bottom line with movies like this is that you should always make sure that the audience is " into it " even before they are given the secret password to enter your world of understanding . 
neg	i mean , showing melissa sagemiller running away from visions for about 20 minutes throughout the movie is just plain lazy ! 
neg	! 
neg	okay , we get it . 
neg	. 
neg	. 
neg	there are people chasing her and we don ' t know who they are . 
neg	do we really need to see it over and over again ? 
neg	how about giving us different scenes offering further insight into all of the strangeness going down in the movie ? 
neg	apparently , the studio took this film away from its director and chopped it up themselves , and it shows . 
neg	there might ' ve been a pretty decent teen mind - fuck movie in here somewhere , but i guess " the suits " decided that turning it into a music video with little edge , would make more sense . 
neg	the actors are pretty good for the most part , although wes bentley just seemed to be playing the exact same character that he did in american beauty , only in a new neighborhood . 
neg	but my biggest kudos go out to sagemiller , who holds her own throughout the entire film , and actually has you feeling her character ' s unraveling . 
neg	overall , the film doesn ' t stick because it doesn ' t entertain , it ' s confusing , it rarely excites and it feels pretty redundant for most of its runtime , despite a pretty cool ending and explanation to all of the craziness that came before it . 
neg	oh , and by the way , this is not a horror or teen slasher flick . 
neg	. 
neg	. 
neg	it ' s just packaged to look that way because someone is apparently assuming that the genre is still hot with the kids . 
neg	it also wrapped production two years ago and has been sitting on the shelves ever since . 
neg	whatever . 
neg	. 
neg	. 
neg	skip it ! 
neg	where ' s joblo coming from ? 
neg	a nightmare of elm street 3 ( 7 / 10 ) - blair witch 2 ( 7 / 10 ) - the crow ( 9 / 10 ) - the crow : salvation ( 4 / 10 ) - lost highway ( 10 / 10 ) - memento ( 10 / 10 ) - the others ( 9 / 10 ) - stir of echoes ( 8 / 10 ) 
pos	dreamworks pictures presents a jinks / cohen company production kevin spacey annette bening " american beauty " thora birch allison janney peter gallagher mena suvari wes bentley and chris cooper co - producers stan wlodkowski alan ball music by thomas newman costume designer julie weiss film editor tariq anway chris greenbury production designer naomi shohan director of photography conrad l . 
pos	hall , a . 
pos	s . 
pos	c . 
pos	produced by bruce cohen & dan jinks written by alan ball directed by sam mendes " both my wife and daughter think i ' m this gigantic loser . 
pos	and they ' re right . 
pos	i have lost something . 
pos	i didn ' t always feel this sedated . " 
pos	with that piece of dialogue , we are fully introduced to lester burnham ( kevin spacey ) , a 42 year old man trapped within his own life . 
pos	lester works for an advertising agency . 
pos	his growing dissatisfaction with his job is only one of the mid - life crisis he is suffering . 
pos	estranged from both his wife and his daughter , lester starts to crack under the stress . 
pos	his life becomes nothing more than a series of mastubatory fantasies , and sullen apathy . 
pos	carolyn burnham ( annette bening ) , is the prototypical career woman / homemaker . 
pos	she carefully tends her rose garden , decorates her home with the best furnishings . 
pos	but inside she is desperate . 
pos	unsuccessful at her profession as a real estate agent , she drives herself into states of denial and self loathing that only feed her growing resentment towards her family . 
pos	the third member of this anti - family is jane burnham ( thora birch ) , lester and carolyn ' s daughter . 
pos	a young girl going through the typical stages of adolescence , but having to also come to terms with her families growing dysfunction . 
pos	this funny ( and frightening ) slice of life is refreshingly simple . 
pos	not one character is given less than is needed to identify him or her . 
pos	some of the most telling characters are those that serve to highlight other characters . 
pos	most notably is barbara fitts ( allison janney ) , the almost catatonic wife of retired marine colonel fitts . 
pos	she has almost no dialogue , and seems to be either recovering from a stroke or suffering from one . 
pos	colonel fitts ( chris cooper ) is an angry and frightened man . 
pos	his rage directed almost singularly at his son , ricky ( wes bentley ) who has just moved with his family to the same neighborhood as the burnham ' s . 
pos	in fact they are the next door neighbors . 
pos	anymore detail into the personalities of these marvelously diverse characters would deprive one of the many pleasures and surprises to be had in " american beauty " . 
pos	alan ball , who was the co - executive producer of the hit tv series " cybil " and creator of the new sitcom " oh grow up " , has fashioned one of the most insightful and expertly tuned screenplays to have hit the screen in the past ten years . 
pos	not one character in this film rings falsely . 
pos	and the depth of personality in each , is achingly honest and insightful . 
pos	the plot detailing the last year in the life of a man as he tries to find his own self worth is so resoundingly cliched and at the same time original as to bring to mind such marvelous film work as " the graduate " or " lolita " . 
pos	kevin spacey turns in one of this years most pragmatic performances . 
pos	his lester burnham is an everyman caught up in the middle of a life that is spiraling into old age . 
pos	finally unable to deal with the lost soul that he has become , lester tries to return to his youth . 
pos	he quits his job ( actually blackmailing his employer for one year ' s salary ) , starts smoking pot , fantasizes about his daughter ' s girlfriend angela ( mena suvari , in a marvelous performance here ) , starts working out , and finally takes a job at the local fast food outlet . 
pos	mr . 
pos	spacey ' s performance is so remarkably subtle and ingenuous , that we can be certain that come oscar ? 
pos	time , we can be assured to see him name among the five nominees . 
pos	annette bening also turns in what may be the best performance of her career . 
pos	carolyn burnham is a woman who has become so insecure as to be caught up in maintaining the facade of normalcy . 
pos	unable to cope with her growing disillusionment , she forces herself to maintain her demeanor , driving her further and further into desperation , adultery and possibly murder . 
pos	ms . 
pos	bening makes the character of carolyn so compelling as to be identifiable to almost anyone . 
pos	the slow and methodical turn from happy home maker to charnel house martha stewart is too frightening to express in words . 
pos	thora birch holds her own against the talents cast with her . 
pos	jane burnham is both an innocent girl caught up in what is a dysfunctional family , and a rebellious child ready to abandon them at any moment . 
pos	her growing distrust and isolation from her family is something that many parents should view as a warning . 
pos	she is the prototypical trophy child . 
pos	when carolyn praises her daughter after a performance by her cheerleading team ( " i ' m so proud of you , honey . 
pos	you didn ' t screw up once ! " 
pos	) , the bitterness and resentment are palpable . 
pos	thora birch is a young actress to watch . 
pos	praise must also go to chris cooper who brings yet another angry father role to life with depth and resonance . 
pos	colonel finn is a man in complete denial . 
pos	his military upbringing masking a desire he is too repulsed to even comprehend . 
pos	wes bentley as ricky finn is fine as the enigma . 
pos	the boy next door who may be more foe than friend . 
pos	a deceitful and calculating young man , whose voyeuristic proclivities mask a deeper and more profound understanding of life than any of the adults around him . 
pos	mr . 
pos	bentley ' s performance is the one troublesome note in the film . 
pos	that is simply because the character is such a grand and complete liar , that one almost faults the performance for it . 
pos	director sam mendes handles all of the particulars of the cast and the settings with a sure and composed style that is neither intrusive nor subtle . 
pos	scenes of carolyn walking through the rain , carry an ominous fission that calls attention to the emotions of the character . 
pos	the subtle cinematography by conrad hall is wonderful , capturing the season in all of it ' s harsh beauty ( fall has never looked so inviting , yet depressing ) . 
pos	every nuance of " american beauty " begs it ' s audience to think and examine . 
pos	it is a film that will be discussed and debated for years to come . 
pos	and well it should , as it is simply one of this years best . 
